6:22–23
22. The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light.
23. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore
the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!


CHRYSOSTOM. Having spoken of the bringing the understanding into captivity because
it was not easy to be understood of many, He transfers it to a sensible instance,
saying, The light of thy body is thy eye. As though He had said, If you do not know
what is meant by the loss of the understanding, learn a parable of the bodily members;
for what the eye is to the body, that the understanding is to the soul. As by the
loss of the eyes we lose much of the use of the other limbs, so when the understanding
is corrupted, your life is filled with many evils.


JEROME. This is an illustration drawn from the senses. As the whole body is in darkness,
where the eye is not single, so if the soul has lost her original brightness, every
sense, or that whole part of the soul to which sensation belongs, will abide in darkness.
Wherefore He says, If then the light which is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness! that is, if the senses which are the soul’s light be darkened by vice,
in how great darkness do you suppose the darkness itself will be wrapped?


PSEUDO-CHRYSOSTOM. It seems that He is not here speaking of the bodily eye, or of
the outward body that is seen, or He would have said, If thine eye be sound, or weak;
but He says, single, and, evil. But if one have a benign yet diseased eye, is his
body therefore in light? Or if an evil yet a sound, is his body therefore in darkness?


JEROME. Those who have thick eye-sight see the lights multiplied; but the single
and clear eye sees them single and clear.


CHRYSOSTOM. Or; The eye He speaks of is not the external but the internal eye. The
light is the understanding, through which the soul sees God. He whose heart is turned
to God, has an eye full of light; that is, his understanding is pure, not distorted
by the influence of worldly lusts. The darkness in us is our bodily senses, which
always desire the things that pertain to darkness. Whoso then has a pure eye, that
is, a spiritual understanding, preserves his body in light, that is, without sin;
for though the flesh desires evil, yet by the might of divine fear the soul resists
it. But whoever has an eye, that is, an understanding, either darkened by the influence
of the malignant passions, or fouled by evil lusts, possesses his body in darkness;
he does not resist the flesh when it lusts after evil things, because he has no hope
in Heaven, which hope alone gives us the strength to resist desire.


HILARY. Otherwise; from the office of the light of the eye, He calls it the light
of the heart; which if it continue single and brilliant, will confer on the body
the brightness of the eternal light, and pour again into the corrupted flesh the
splendor of its origin, that is, in the resurrection. But if it be obscured by sin,
and evil in will, the bodily nature will yet abide subject to all the evils of the
understanding.


AUGUSTINE. (ubi sup.) Otherwise; by the eye here we may understand our purpose; if
that be pure and right, all our works which we work according thereto are good. These
He here calls the body, as the Apostle speaks of certain works as members; Mortify
your members, fornication and uncleanness. (Col. 3:5.) We should look then, not to
what a person does, but with what mind he does it. For this is the light within us,
because by this we see that we do with good intention what we do. For all which doth
make manifest is light. (Eph. 5:13.) But the deeds themselves, which go forth to
men’s society, have a result to us uncertain, and therefore He calls them darkness;
as when I give money to one in need, I know not what he will do with it. If then
the purport of your heart, which you can know, is defiled with the lust of temporal
things, much more is the act itself, of which the issue is uncertain, defiled. For
even though one should reap good of what you do with a purport not good; it will
be imputed to you as you did it, not as it resulted to him. If however our works
are done with a single purport, that is with the aim of charity, then are they pure
and pleasing in God’s sight.


AUGUSTINE. (cont. Mendac. 7.) But acts which are known to be in themselves sins,
are not to be done as with a good purpose; but such works only as are either good
or bad, according as the motives from which they are done are either good or bad,
and are not in themselves sins; as to give food to the poor is good if it be done
from merciful motives, but evil if it be done from ostentation. But such works as
are in themselves sins, who will say that they are to be done with good motives,
or that they are not sins? Who would say, Let us rob the rich, that we may have to
give to the poor?


GREGORY. (Mor. xxviii. 11.) Otherwise; if the light that is in thee, that is, if
what we have begun to do well, we overcloud with evil purpose, when we do things
which we know to be in themselves evil, how great is the darkness!


REMIGIUS. (ap. Gloss. ord.) Otherwise; faith is likened to a light, because by it
the goings of the inner man, that is, action, are lightened, that he should not stumble
according to that, Thy word is a light to my feet. (Ps. 119:105.) If that then be
pure and single, the whole body is light; but if defiled, the whole body will be
dark. Yet otherwise; by the light may be understood the ruler of the Church, who
may be well called the eye, as he it is that ought to see that wholesome things be
provided for the people under him, which are understood by the body. If then the
ruler of the Church err, how much more will the people subject to him err?
